tridivavardhakivardhitakauśalaṃ tridaśadattasamastavibhūtimat |
jaladhimadhyagataṃ tvamabhūṣayo navapuraṃ vapurañcitarociṣā ||1||
tridiva-vardhaki-	heaven's architect
vardhita-kauśalaṃ	excelling the skill
tridaśa-datta-	by the gods given
samasta-vibhūtimat	all the majesties
jaladhi-madhyagataṃ	in the ocean's middle situated
tvam-abhūṣaya:	Thou adorned
nava-puraṃ	the new city
vapu:-añcita-	by Thy form's marked
rociṣā	resplendence
Even though Vishwakarmaa, the divine architect had employed all his excellent skills in building it and the gods had lavished all their divine embellishments on the city, which was situated in the middle of the ocean, it was adorned by the marked resplendence of Thy form.
daduṣi revatabhūbhṛti revatīṃ halabhṛte tanayāṃ vidhiśāsanāt |
mahitamutsavaghoṣamapūpuṣa: samuditairmuditai: saha yādavai: ||2||
daduṣi	(when) was given
revata-bhūbhṛti	by the Revata king
revatīṃ halabhṛte	Revatee for Balaraam
tanayāṃ	the daughter
vidhi-śāsanāt	by Brahmaa's instructions
mahitam-utsava-	great festive
ghoṣam-apūpuṣa:	celebration was performed by Thee
samuditai:-muditai:	who had gathered happily
saha yādavai:	with the Yaadavas
At the instructions of Brahmaa, the king of Revata gave his daughter Revatee in marriage to Balaraam. On this event with all the Yaadavaas, who had assembled, Thou happily performed a great festive celebration.
atha vidarbhasutāṃ khalu rukmiṇīṃ praṇayinīṃ tvayi deva sahodara: |
svayamaditsata cedimahībhuje svatamasā tamasādhumupāśrayan ||3||
atha vidarbha-sutāṃ	then, king of Vidarbh's (Bheeshmaka's) daughter
khalu rukmiṇīṃ	indeed Rukmini
praṇayinīṃ tvayi	in love with Thee
deva sahodara:	O Lord! Her brother
svayam-aditsata	of his own will decided to give
cedi-mahībhuje	to the Chedi king (Shishupaal)
sva-tamasā	because of his Tamas guna, ignorance
tam-asādhum-	him the non virtuous
upāśrayan	having made him a friend
The daughter of the king of Vidarbh (Bheeshmaka), Rukmini was indeed in love with Thee. O Lord! Her brother,Rukmi, due to his ignorance caused by his Tamas guna, of his own will resolved to give her to the Chedi king Shishupaal. Rukmi had made friends with Shishupaal who was totally non virtuous.
ciradhṛtapraṇayā tvayi bālikā sapadi kāṅkṣitabhaṅgasamākulā |
tava nivedayituṃ dvijamādiśat svakadanaṃ kadanaṅgavinirmitaṃ ||4||
cira-dhṛta-praṇayā	for long holding love
tvayi bālikā	for Thee, the girl
sapadi	at once
kāṅkṣita-bhaṅga-	(her) desire being broken
samākulā	(foreseeing) and distressed
tava nivedayitum	to Thee, to communicate
dvijam-ādiśat	a Braahmin instructed
sva-kadanaṃ	her distress
kadana-aṅga-	the cruel Cupid
vinirmitam	caused by
For a long time holding love for Thee, which was brought about by the cruel Cupid, the girl at once instructed a Brahmin to acquaint Thee of her distress by the immanent threat to the fulfillment of her desire,
dvijasuto'pi ca tūrṇamupāyayau tava puraṃ hi durāśadurāsadam |
mudamavāpa ca sādarapūjita: sa bhavatā bhavatāpahṛtā svayam ||5||
dvija-suta:-api	the Brahmin boy also
ca tūrṇam-upāyayau	and soon reached
tava puraṃ hi	Thy city indeed
durāśa-durāsadaṃ	for the wicked inaccessible
mudam-avāpa ca	and great joy attained
sādara-pūjita:	with the honour received
sa bhavatā	he (was) by Thee
bhava-tāpa-hṛtā	(who are) from worldly afflictions, the remover
svayam	Thyself
The Brahmin boy soon reached Thy city which is inaccessible to wicked minded people. He was highly delighted and attained great joy on being received with honour by Thyself the remover of the worldly travails and afflictions of men.
sa ca bhavantamavocata kuṇḍine nṛpasutā khalu rājati rukmiṇī |
tvayi samutsukayā nijadhīratārahitayā hi tayā prahito'smyaham ||6||
sa ca	he and
bhavantam-avocata	to Thee said
kuṇḍine	in Kundina
nṛpa-sutā khalu	the king's daughter indeed
rājati rukmiṇī	shines Rukmini
tvayi samutsukayā	in Thee deeply in love
nija-dhīratā-rahitayā	her own restrain loosing
hi tayā prahita:-	indeed by her sent
asmi-aham	am I
And he said to Thee 'In Kundinaa (capital of Vidarbha) lives the noble princess Rukmini. She is deeply in love with Thee. She who has lost her own restrain has indeed sent me here.'
tava hṛtā'smi puraiva guṇairahaṃ harati māṃ kila cedinṛpo'dhunā |
ayi kṛpālaya pālaya māmiti prajagade jagadekapate tayā ||7||
tava hṛtā-asmi	by Thee captivated am I
purā-eva	since long even
guṇai:-ahaṃ	by (Thy) excellences, I
harati māṃ kila	capturing me indeed is
cedi-nṛpa:-adhunā	the Chedi king now
ayi kṛpālaya (kṛpā-ālaya)	O Abode of Compassion!
pālaya mām-iti	save me, thus
prajagade	was prayed
jagadekapate (jagat-eka-pate)	O Lord of the worlds!
tayā	by her
From long since I am a captive of Thy excellences. Now the king of Chedi (Shishupaal) is going to captivate me. O Abode of Compassion! Save me.' O Lord of the worlds! Thus she prayed to Thee.
aśaraṇāṃ yadi māṃ tvamupekṣase sapadi jīvitameva jahāmyaham |
iti girā sutanoratanot bhṛśaṃ suhṛdayaṃ hṛdayaṃ tava kātaram ||8||
aśaraṇām	helpless
yadi māṃ	if me
tvam-upekṣase	Thou forsake
sapadi jīvitam-eva	soon life itself
jahāmi-aham	will kill I
iti girā sutano:-	these words of the fair one
atanot bhṛśaṃ	brought about deep
suhṛt-ayaṃ	by this good hearted (Braahmin)
hṛdayaṃ tava kātaram	(in) heart Thy agitation
If Thou will forsake me, the helpless one, I will certainly end my life soon.' This massage of the fair Rukmini from the good hearted Braahmin, brought about deep agitation in Thy heart.
akathayastvamathainamaye sakhe tadadhikā mama manmathavedanā |
nṛpasamakṣamupetya harāmyahaṃ tadayi tāṃ dayitāmasitekṣaṇām ||9||
akathaya:-	told
tvam-atha-enam-	Thou then to him
aye sakhe	O friend!
tat-adhikā	more than her
mama manmatha-vedanā	(are) my love pangs
nṛpa samakṣam-	in the front of the kings
upetya harāmi-ahaṃ	coming there will take away I
tat-ayi tāṃ	so it is, O (friend), that
dayitām-asita-īkṣaṇām	dear dark eyed one
Thou then told him, 'O friend! My love pangs are more intense than hers. Therefore, I will come, and in presence of the kings, take away the dear dark eyed one.'
pramuditena ca tena samaṃ tadā rathagato laghu kuṇḍinameyivān |
gurumarutpuranāyaka me bhavān vitanutāṃ tanutāṃ nikhilāpadām ||10||
pramuditena ca	and with the delighted
tena samaṃ tadā	with him then
ratha-gata: laghu	getting into the chariot immediately
kuṇḍinam-eyivān	to Kundina (Thou) reached
gurumarutpuranāyaka	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
me bhavān	of me, Thou
vitanutāṃ tanutāṃ	deign to bring about relief
nikhila-āpadām	from all my afflictions
O Lord of Guruvaayur! Along with the highly delighted Braahmin, Thou immediately got into the chariot and soon reached Kundina. May Thou deign to bring about relief for me from all my afflictions.